# Comparing Results and Performance of Common Differential Gene Expression Analysis Tools

#### Sahej Randhawa

## Biological Question
My biological question is how do different tools for differential gene expression analysis differ when run on the same input dataset? Specific metrics to answer this question would be in terms of resources used (time and memory) and the outputted differentially expressed genes. This project was inspired by the paper (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0105004#s3), which performs differential gene expression analysis on various tail segment cells and cells at various developmental stages of the _Anolis carolinensis_ lizard to study how differences in gene expression may dovetail with limb (tail) regenerative capability. In this paper, they use both DESeq2 and Cuffdiff2 for differential gene expression and obtain different numbers of genes with significant differential gene expression, presenting Cuffdiff2 results in heatmap and DESeq2 results in Venn diagram comparing against Cuffdiff2’s results. They then proceed with CuffDiff2 results for the rest of the paper. I wish to compare one of these tools, Cuffdiff2, against the analogous tool used in class, the kallisto and sleuth method, especially because FAQs from sleuth suggest there should be an accuracy difference because of kallisto and sleuth using bootstrapping. This investigation will also encompass and implicitly answer a secondary question: which genes are differentially expressed in this biological scenario of the lizard’s regenerating tail segments?

## Dataset
The dataset we will be using is RNA-seq data from the _Anolis carolinensis_ lizard in the form of paired-end reads at least 104bp in length (based on the max post-trimming read length reported by the above study). The NCBI Bioproject accession number is PRJNA253971. Specifically, we will compare the RNA-seq data for two tail sections for one biological replicate, namely the S5 segment (closest to tail beginning from body, SRA: SRX642055, 1.2Gb) and S1 segment (closest to tail end, SRA: SRX642051, 1.4Gb). These are available in FASTQ format. The reference genome can be found at GenBank accession number AAWZ00000000.2 in FASTA format. As the files together sum to over 2GB, we will down-sample the reads as discussed in lecture. The publication linked to this data is the aforementioned paper by Hutchins et al. (2014), which can be found at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0105004#s3. This data meets the listed project requirements as it is publically available (at given Bioproject and SRA id’s), will be downsampled to be less than 2GB, has not been analyzed in class, and is related to the differential expression analysis lab (lab 4) that we did in class.

## Bioinformatics Pipeline
I will first conduct the initial preparation steps. First, I will assess read quality (using fastqc) and perform trimming (using sickle pe) as needed. Second, I will align the reads to the _Anolis carolinensis_ reference genome (likely using TopHat as the paper did or STAR based on initial reads about its sufficient runtime and accuracy given sufficient RAM). This step will meet the requirement of using a tool not used in class. As I am aware this alignment step might be time-intensive, I will down-sample the downloaded data based on consulting a TA/the professor and attempting to run this alignment step. These steps will prepare the data for the primary experimental step. Then, differential gene expression analysis will be conducted using kallisto and sleuth as in class and also Cuffdiff2, also meeting the requirement of using a new tool. The output will be compared via generating a heatmap visualization and comparing the different numbers of differentially expressed genes produced by each tool. Performance will be compared using UNIX tools like time. The total number of tools used will meet or exceed 5, and this analysis seems plausible to complete in 2 weeks as we were able to complete the pre-processing and differential expression analysis in 1 week during lab 4, giving an extra week to download and learn how to use the new tools and produce the read alignments. 
